---
title: "Balance 2020"
output: pdf_document
documentclass: article
classoption: onecolumn
pdf_document:
latex_engine: xelatex
toc: true
lof: true
numberSections: true
highlight: tango
sectionsDepth: 3
chapters: True
figPrefix:
  - "Fig."
  - "Figs."
secPrefix:
  - "Section"
  - "Sections"
fontsize: 12pt
geometry: margin=1in
mainfont: DejaVu Serif
autoEqnLabels: true
crossref: true
cref: true
---

# Balance of the 2020


## Main acivities/tasks/things done in 2020

- **Experimentally related**
  - 1st SATAY round on ylic133 (WT) and ylic136 (nrp1::HYGRO)
  - Send those samples to sequence in Oxford establishing a collaboration with Agnes Michel from Benoit group. She offered to me that possibility and I accepted it. 
  - Construction of new strains for SATAY bem3::NAT and bem3::NAT nrp1::HYGRO (still they haven't been checked)
- **Theoretical/software related**
  - Machine learning model to predict whether a gene pair will be synthetic lethal or not based on the shared protein domains from their protein products. This was a hands on exercise to get into this topic and learn the methods and the context of application. This was a successful replication study from a paper.  
  - Application of open science principles in my daily practice in a more explicit way.
    - Experimental journal publication in the web as a static web site using Jupyter Book integrating *utterances* and *hypothesis* plugins that allows the interaction with other people . Every page has a window where you can write comments and they are automatically converted to issues in the github repository is based the journal. 
    - Structure and publish the code in a github repository respecting  certain guidelines : using readme , python modules and scripts. If there is something I would like to document further then use the jupyter notebooks. 
    - Use of boards in Github to manage group projects like the satay group where I have track of the tasks that need to be done , what is in progress and what is finished. These tasks are organized in the shape of issues where you can document in your own. 
    - More use of git and continuous integration for web deployment using github actions and also for machine learning models. 
    - [ ] dig into data version control (dvc) for 2021
- **Daily practices**
  - Keep using and improving my local *electronic labnotebook* in Visual Studio Code, using the same experimental template as before. 
    
  - I moved from VuePress to JupyterBook which is handier , and easier to customize (https://leilaicruz.github.io/Experimental-journal-jupyterBOOK/intro.html)
 
- **Capacities acquired**
  - Python programming for experimental data analysis and visualization.
  - Machine learning methods with the python library : sklearn
  - Cloning of yeast strains
  - successful first SATAY workflow 
  
- **PhD practicalities**
  - Successful Yearly meeting. 
  - Discipline related skills ECTS: 15
  - Transferables related skills ECTS: 8
  - Research related skills ECTS: 6.5

## Reflection from the outlook to the 2020 (in the Balance from 2019)



## Reflections

- This year has been the corona year where many things got paralyzed , and all the meetings have been held online. 
- I have taken few courses from the Graduate School. 

## Retrospective from the tasks proposed for 2020 

### Designed plan to accomplish in the next 3 years
### Perspective on the next three years (Project Plan)
- [x] Finish the Fridtjof paper, about the evolution of self organization related functions,and integrate this results with my original PhD.
    - Sent to Elife and rejected because of lack of match between the paper title and aims and the experimental back up. 
    - Working on more suplementary experiments to back up some important controls associated with demonstrating that the sfGFP does not influence the behaviour of the strains with/without the Gal promoter.
- [ ] Write a paper with the results of the mapping of essential/non essential genes from the *bem1$\Delta$* , *bem1$\Delta$bem3$\Delta$* and *bem1$\Delta$bem3$\Delta$nrp1$\Delta$* backgrounds. ($\Delta$ - symbolyze knockout)
  - Still working on that. So far I have done SATAY from $\Delta nrp1$ and WT. Next one can be $\Delta bem3$ and $\Delta bem3nrp1$.
  - $\Delta bem1$ is a tricky strain due to its high instability. A master student from Enzo , called Wessel, has been working on that , and managed to do a SATAY experiment in this background using an auxin degradable protein system . With this , *bem1* gets degraded in situ just before the reseeding , which is the fitness step (regrowth of the libraries) in SATAY. Still the results has not been sequenced.
- [ ] Write a paper about, how gene expression can influence genetic interactions in bem1$\Delta$ strains. Specifically, how Cdc42 changes in gene expression  can alter the SATAY map of essential and non-essential genes of the Bem1 deleted strain. Or perhaps, engineer a *bem1* promoter to control its native expression in the cell.
  - Interesting idea but difficult to tune the gene expression from Cdc42. We have currently a strain made by Els which has Bem1 under a galactose inducible promoter.
- [ ] Write a paper about how the  correlation between type of interactions and shared interactors, can be extended to more than one gene deletion. Basically is asking the question, how in a double deleted background, can we identify possible positive, negative and synthetic lethal interactions? with the results of SATAY with strains with multiple mutations.
    - This is a mindset of constantly looking for correlations among biological properties like gene ontology terms , protein domains, pathways , etc woth genetic interactions. So far when looking at all genes to the shared number of interactors the correlation is not very clear , but there is a tendency for SL to share more interactors and also GO terms.
- [ ] Test that in order to *nrp1*  be deleted to improve the overall fitness of the organism, in *bem1$\Delta$bem3$\Delta$* background, the hub genes *cla4*, *cdc3* and *act1* have to be present. Therefore, I am planning to perform a "short" evolution experiment starting with *bem1$\Delta$bem3$\Delta$* background to test the *nrp1* deletion in 4 different genetic lines:

-  *bem1$\Delta$bem3$\Delta$cdc3$\Delta$*
-  *bem1$\Delta$bem3$\Delta$act1$\Delta$*
-  *bem1$\Delta$bem3$\Delta$cla4$\Delta$*

  - This could be tested with SATAY on those triplicates and double mutants , by finding in the double mutants a significant higher reads on nrpi1 locus than in the triplicates where the "hub" genes are deleted. 

### "Realistic plan" (for 2020) , after 6 months from the GO-NO-GO meeting:
- [ ] Write a paper with the results of the mapping of essential/non essential genes from the *bem1$\Delta$* , *bem1$\Delta$bem3$\Delta$* and *bem1$\Delta$bem3$\Delta$nrp1$\Delta$* backgrounds.
  - Not possible /Not realistic 
- [ ] Write a paper about, how gene expression can influence genetic interactions in bem1$\Delta$ strains. Specifically, how Cdc42 changes in gene expression  can alter the SATAY map of essential and non-essential genes of the Bem1 deleted strain. Or perhaps, engineer a *bem1* promoter to control its native expression in the cell.
  -  Not possible /Not realistic 


## Outlook for 2021

- My focus in this year will be experimental , I will try to do the biggest number of experiments to get the data from . 
- I have realized that the data analysis / modelling and the conceptualization tasks are better to perform alone when writing the thesis for example. 

### Main experiments for 2021

1. Strain construction:
  - $\Delta bem3$
  - $\Delta bem3\Delta nrp1$
  - $\Delta bem3\Delta bem1$
  - $\Delta bem3\Delta bem1\Delta cla4$ for testing linkage model
  - $\Delta bem3\Delta bem1\Delta cdc3$ for testing linkage model
  - $\Delta bem3\Delta bem1\Delta act1$ for testing linkage model

2. SATAY on:
  - all strains above

3. Analyse sequencing data

4. Make the software pipeline FAIR 
